Document Cosmos changes in 9.0 (#4812)
dotnet/EntityFramework.Docs: entity-framework/core/providers/cosmos/querying.md

Starting with EF 9.0, EF automatically detects and extracts partition key comparisons in your LINQ query's `Where` operators. Let's assume we execute the following query against our `Session` entity type, which is configured with a hierarchical partition key:

```csharp
protected override void OnModelCreating(ModelBuilder modelBuilder)
{
    modelBuilder.Entity<Session>()
        .HasPartitionKey(b => new { b.TenantId, b.UserId, b.SessionId })
}

var tenantId = "Microsoft";
var userId = new Guid("99A410D7-E467-4CC5-92DE-148F3FC53F4C");
var username = "scott";

var sessions = await context.Sessions
    .Where(
        e => e.TenantId == tenantId
             && e.UserId == userId
             && e.SessionId > 0
             && e.Username == username)
    .ToListAsync();
```

Examining the logs generated by EF, we see this query executed as follows:

```sql
Executed ReadNext (166.6985 ms, 2.8 RU) ActivityId='312da0d2-095c-4e73-afab-27072b5ad33c', Container='test', Partition='["Microsoft","99a410d7-e467-4cc5-92de-148f3fc53f4c"]', Parameters=[]
SELECT VALUE c
FROM root c
WHERE ((c["SessionId"] > 0) AND CONTAINS(c["Username"], "a"))
```

In these logs, we notice the following:

> * The first two comparisons - on `TenantId` and `UserId` - have been lifted out, and appear in the ReadNext's "Partition" rather than in the `WHERE` clause; this means that query will only execute on the subpartitions for those values.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
* The first two comparisons - on `TenantId` and `UserId` - have been lifted out and appear in the `ReadNext` "Partition" rather than in the `WHERE` clause; this means that query will only execute on the subpartitions for those values.
```

* `SessionId` is also part of the hierarchical partition key, but instead of an equality comparison, it uses a greater-than operator (`>`), and therefore cannot be lifted out. It is part of the `WHERE` clause like any regular property.
* `Username` is a regular property - not part of the partition key - and therefore remains in the `WHERE` clause as well.

> Note that even though not all three partition key properties are provided, hierarchical partition keys still allow targeting only the subpartitions which correspond to the first two properties. While this isn't as efficient as targeting a single partition (as identified by all three properties), it's still much more efficient than targeting all partitions.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
Note that even though some of the partition key values are not provided, hierarchical partition keys still allow targeting only the subpartitions which correspond to the first two properties. While this isn't as efficient as targeting a single partition (as identified by all three properties), it's still much more efficient than targeting all partitions.
```

```c#
var session = await context.Sessions.SingleAsync(
    e => e.Id == someId
         && e.TenantId == tenantId
         && e.UserId == userId
         && e.SessionId == sessionId);
```

In this query, a value for the `Id` property is provided (which is mapped to the Cosmos DB `id` property), as well as values for all the partition key properties. Furthermore, there are no additional components to the query. When all these conditions are met, EF is able to execute the query as a point read:

```console
Executed ReadItem (46 ms, 1 RU) ActivityId='d7391311-2266-4811-ae2d-535904c42c43', Container='test', Id='9', Partition='["Microsoft","99a410d7-e467-4cc5-92de-148f3fc53f4c",10.0]'
```

Note the `ReadItem`, which indicates that the query was executed as an efficient point read - no SQL query is involved.

Note that as with partition key extraction, significant improvements have been made to this mechanism in EF 9.0; older versions do not reliably detect and use point reads.

## Pagination

> [!NOTE]

> > This feature was introduced in EF Core 9.0.

Reviewer: Should mention that it's currently experimental as we want to hear feedback before we finalize the API shape

Pagination refers to retrieving results in pages, rather than all at once; this is typically done for large resultsets, where a user interface is displayed, allowing users to navigate through pages of the results.

A common way to implement pagination with databases is to use the `Skip` and `Take` LINQ operators (`OFFSET` and `LIMIT` in SQL). Given a page size of 10 results, the third page can be fetched with EF Core as follows:

```csharp
var position = 20;
var nextPage = context.Session
    .OrderBy(s => s.Id)
    .Skip(position)
    .Take(10)
    .ToList();
```

Unfortunately, this technique is quite inefficient and can considerably increase querying costs. Cosmos DB provides a special mechanism for paginating through the result of a query, via the use of _continuation tokens_:

```csharp
CosmosPage firstPage = await context.Sessions
    .OrderBy(s => s.Id)
    .ToPageAsync(pageSize: 10, continuationToken: null);

> string continuationToken = page.ContinuationToken;

Reviewer: ```suggestion
string continuationToken = firstPage.ContinuationToken;
```

foreach (var session in firstPage.Values)
{
    // Display/send the sessions to the user
}
```

Rather than terminating the LINQ query with `ToListAsync` or similar, we use the `ToPageAsync` method, instructing it to get at most 10 items in every page (note that there may be fewer items in the database). Since this is our first query, we'd like to get results from the beginning, and pass `null` as the continuation token. `ToPageAsync` returns a `CosmosPage`, which exposes a continuation token and the values in the page (up to 10 items). Your program will typically send those values to the client, along with the continuation token; this will allow resuming the query later and fetching more results.

Let's assume the user now clicks on the "Next" button in their UI, asking for the next 10 items. You can then execute the query as follows:

```csharp
CosmosPage nextPage = await context.Sessions.OrderBy(s => s.Id).ToPageAsync(10, continuationToken);
string continuationToken = nextPage.ContinuationToken;
foreach (var session in nextPage.Values)
{
    // Display/send the sessions to the user
}
```

> We execute the same query, but this time we pass in the continuation token received from the first execution; this instructs Cosmos DB to continue the query where it left off, and fetch the next 10 items. This method of paginating is extremely efficient and cost-effective compared to using `Skip` and `Take`.

Reviewer: Consider mentioning that `continuationToken` will be `null` if there are no more results

To learn more about pagination in Cosmos DB, [see this page](/azure/cosmos-db/nosql/query/pagination).

> [!NOTE]

> > Cosmos DB does not support backwards pagination.

Reviewer: Consider just making this part of a limitation list.

Another limitation is that it doesn't tell you how many pages are available.

Author: Added the limitation on the number of pages. For now I'll leave the note here, as IMHO it makes sense to call this out in a highlight inside the section (and there doesn't seem to be enough for a full list of limitations just for pagination). We can change later of course.

>
> `ToPageAsync` is currently annotated as experimental, since it may be replaced with a more general EF pagination API that isn't Cosmos-specific. Although using the current API will generate a compilation warning (`EF9102`), doing so should be safe - future changes may require minor tweaks in the API shape.

## `FindAsync`

> [`FindAsync`](xref:core/change-tracking/entity-entries#find-and-findasync) is a useful API for getting a an entity by its primary key, and avoiding a database roundtrip when the entity has already been loaded and is tracked by the context.

Reviewer: ```suggestion
[`FindAsync`](xref:core/change-tracking/entity-entries#find-and-findasync) is a useful API for getting an entity by its primary key and avoiding a database roundtrip when the entity has already been loaded and is tracked by the context.
```

> Usually, the primary key of an entity type consists e.g. of an `Id` property. When using the EF Cosmos DB provider, the primary key also contains the partition key properties; this is the case since Cosmos DB allows different partitions to contain documents with the same JSON `id` property, and so only the combined `id` and partition key uniquely identify a single document in a container:

Reviewer: ```suggestion
When using the EF Cosmos DB provider, the primary key contains the partition key properties in addition to the property mapped to the JSON `id` property; this is the case since Cosmos DB allows different partitions to contain documents with the same JSON `id` property, and so only the combined `id` and partition key uniquely identify a single document in a container:
```
